BLUE ROAN All winter, Father’s home-made caravan stands empty among Mother’s hives. Home is The School; the walls are dark rough pink like the ex-army roan gelding in the livery yard next door. Damp, most of the time for this is Carlisle, you don’t often see sun. Father is Headmaster so he’s free – he’s the favourite child did I mention that? – to effervesce into cellars under empty classrooms and Indian-file his brothers and little sister into the dark. As she herself, last of the bunch, remembered as I was driving her north to the Lakes, the wild blue distances, named mountains she thought she’d never see again, where they used to camp in that caravan all summer long. But something changed in him, she said. Something mysterious, dimming the afternoon.  CARE OF THE VOICE I’m working on Care of the Voice in the kitchen when you come in from packing. ‘An observer in armed conflict – there’s danger, yes, that’s true – but it’s managed.’ You’re off to Colombia to witness for the raped, disappeared, displaced: widows and farmers working ancestral upland in the face of paramilitaries and drug barons who want to sell valleys and mountains to coca factories and multinational investors in palm oil and plantain. I think of holding my breath when you played Sarasati’s Carmen Fantasie in an end-of-term concert, and hitch-hiked to Morocco your first year in college. Of when you dad and I – and the old dog, almost your sister – brought home a puppy, soft silvery Velvet, and you lay down with her laughing on the sofa. When we tracked a perfectly circular iridescent beetle over pebbles on a Cretan shore through twigs of wind-snapped mimosa. A TRIP TO THE MOON My mother is moving house. She’s ninety-one and determined: words like sheltered accommodation are coming at us from outer space but it’s not like that, at least not yet. There are spare rooms in the new home, she’ll have a small garden, feed nuthatches, do her own cooking, grow shrubs. Still, down the slope will be a sanatorium. That’s the point. A clinic, an Alzheimer’s wing. She doesn’t want to be a burden. In every room is a vermilion string to pull if you fall over. When I clear out her cupboards we find histories woven in every blanket, like this scorch mark made the winter the heating failed. Should she sell the oversize kitchen clock (which she still gets up on a ladder to wind every Sunday, as my dad used to do) to the blind piano tuner who took a shine to it when he came to value the piano? Or should it stay around in case one day some grandchild might give it a home? For the first time in her life she’ll live only with things she has chosen. No husband or children to consider, no furniture from aunts. She can sell, she can give things away. Traumas of today, contracts to exchange, dates of completion, arguments over who’ll let the carpenter in to the new place to measure up, will be forgotten because forgetting is an issue let’s face it. And she is, she is facing it. She’ll be three miles from family but she’s going to an unknown zone. 